# GABA Support

Hyper NMDA/calcium chemistry drives many physical/mental/emotional health issues, including but not limited to, depression, anxiety, drug/medication withdrawal, schizophrenia, OCD, bipolar disorder, BPD, PTSD, Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, dementia, and mitochondrial dysfunction, etc.

The NMDA/calcium receptors are responsible for all pain perception: physical, mental, emotional. Hyper Calcium activation also precedes oxidative stress and inflammation in many areas of the body.

You may notice you are experiencing this biochemistry when you experience racing or rapid cycling thoughts and emotions, hypersensitivity, sensory overload (smell, sound, taste, touch), crawling of the skin, intrusive thoughts, rumination, hyper emotionality, delusional thinking, suicidal ideation, and compulsions for self harm.

The first step to relieve this chemistry is to breathe in through the nose and out through the nose. Maintain this breathing until baseline is restored. Pranayama or prana breathing directly relieves calcium, cortisol, and adrenaline. Stress chemistry. It is crucial to bring the nervous system back down to a functional state. It can be self defeating if this is ignored as improper breathing can be a stressor in itself.

Next up, grab your magnesium chloride water solution. If you don’t have one, measure out 50-250g magnesium chloride flakes/salt, pour into 1/2 liter glass spray bottle (don’t use plastic), pour distilled water until full and shake until dissolved. Now that you have a magnesium chloride water solution, you’re going to want to SOAK the back of your head, the entire circumference of your neck, and preferably above the heart and over the rest of the organs. I don’t mean damp or a couple sprays here or there, I mean WET. Keep a cool damp rag on hand in case of any itching, dabbing at the area will make it subside.

Now, depending on your magnesium bowel tolerance and how much stress management relief you need in your specific context, try giving 1 tsp - 1 tbsp magnesium chloride flakes/salt dissolved in a glass of water a shot. This will taste salty, but you will notice immediate physical/mental calming balance. Start on the lower end if you’re prone to bowel flush. Any excess will be flushed by the kidneys if you have healthy kidney function. Just stick to the topical spray/bath if you don’t.

If you need additional NMDA/calcium relief, bring in the magnesium glycinate and l-theanine powder. 200-500mg Magnesium glycinate and 200-500mg l-theanine either orally or under the tongue for daytime context. You can safely increase to 800-1000mg of each before bedtime or if you don’t need to worry about taking a nap (probably preferable to hyper NMDA/calcium regardless).

For rumination and intrusive thoughts and OCD compulsions specifically, dissolve a good tbsp of inositol (Myoinositol triphosphate/IP3) under the tongue for fast relief. This is also an excellent tool for relieving sugar cravings by correcting blood sugar regulation and oxidative metabolism. It is also noted that those who commit suicide have reduced levels of inositol in their brain.

As for herbal medicines, you can toss some Bacopa, Blue lotus, Gotu kola, Magnolia bark, and Oat straw in a pot for tea. They are fine in one big pot, steeped 20 min is a good average time. Add some lemon or a pinch of magnesium chloride to draw out the goodies. Black seed oil is super useful here as well by not only balancing GABA/glutamate, but also balancing endorphin/dynorphin (mu opioid/kappa opioid receptors) and correcting tryptophan metabolism into NAD+ for super inflammation relief as well. I like to munch on the seeds and add them to my cooking. Super tasty and feels very medicinal.

Niacin is what’s most important when it comes to the delusional/paranoid thinking prior to self harm and/or suicidal ideation. Paranoid delusions are niacin deficiency. Liver and kefir are some of my favorite food sources for niacin, but supplement may be necessary (nicotinic acid for inflammation/tryptophan correction/Niacinamide for extra GABA/serotonin support).

Inositol is important for depression with suicidal ideation. Goat kefir again specifically, more Inositol than cow milk, and GRAPEFRUIT. Grapefruit also helps to shift your hormone chemistry outside of hyper estrogen while reducing estrogen/xenoestrogenic wastes. It is important to know these wastes can be recirculated back into the bloodstream via the colon without FIBER. Specifically lignan fiber. Soak and blend fresh ground flax and/or chia seed into your kefir. The longer you soak, the better gut microbiome repopulation and competition with unfriendly bacteria strains and the more the flax lignan is activated for eliminating wastes. It is a prebiotic + probiotic combination while clearing estrogen wastes that contribute to gut microbiome overgrowth. This will have a greater impact on emotional stability and health than you can imagine. We are being poisoned by xenoestrogenic poisons in our environment and food/water supply on a daily basis. It impacts mental/emotional health more than you assume. Watch.

In addition to B vitamins and enzymes needed to use them, Inositol, phosphorus, potassium, balanced omega 3/6 ratio, the specific bacteria in goat kefir promotes GABA production in the gut where most GABA is produced in the body. This is carried via the enteric nervous system/vagus nerve/gut-brain axis to the brain, nervous system, and spine where it is used in bio processes. It really must be a daily staple for anyone. Without live biotics, your liver function suffers even further, allowing more poison to accumulate.

Magnesium, Potassium, Phosphorus, Chloride, Bicarbonate, Zinc, Glycine, Taurine, Omega 3 (DHA/EPA), Agmatine, L-theanine, Thiamine, Riboflavin, Niacin, B6/P5P, Biotin, B12s (methylcobalamin/adenosylcobalamin), vitamin K2 are the major nutrient cofactors needed for NMDA/calcium management and prevention.

Stress, too much copper and not enough zinc, too much calcium and not enough magnesium, gut microbiome dysbiosis, all drugs and many medications (caffeine, nicotine, smoked cannabis, alcohol, sugar included), artificial/blue light and not enough sunlight, heavy metals, industrial and agricultural toxins, molds, porn/excessive sex, social media, and for foods: refined sucrose/fructose (anytime insulin spikes, so does glutamate), industrialized vegetable/seed oils, soy, corn, wheat/gluten, beans/legumes/nightshades, cow dairy, caffeine, smoke, alcohol.

These are the many triggers for NMDA/calcium activation. Glutamate is implicated in anything involving cognition, consciousness, and the brain and nervous system.
