# Magnesium

Magnesium is one of the human body's primary electrolyte minerals involved in about 40% of all enzymes. In 2012, there was a study titled The Magnesome that found that instead of the constantly regurgitated 325 processes, Magnesium is used in 3174 processes within the human body. This doesn't even account for the importance of Magnesium in Mg-ATP development, one of the main forms of energy in EVERY process of the body.

Excessive Intracellular and extracellular Ca+2 (Calcium) is implicated in nearly every single inflammatory cytokine and response within the body and guess what the body's primary defense against hyper Ca+2 activation is? Magnesium! This implies that Magnesium is one of our primary defenses against the hyperinflammatory modern environment today, with factors that consist of blue light, nnEMF, sunlight with poor redox status, agricultural toxins (pesticides, herbicides, fungicides), heavy metals, unbound copper and iron, molds, bacteria, viruses, parasites, etc. It is incredibly important to maintain sufficient Magnesium levels to maintain optimal biological performance. Ca+2/Calcium-glutamate hyperactivation depletes magnesium like no other while displacing potassium from the mitochondria and cells, creating a situation where the individual is susceptible to heart failure, among many other diseases/conditions.

With all of these factors involved with the modern environment today, Magnesium is rapidly depleted on a daily basis and must be repleted on a daily basis. Surplus intake is an excellent preventative approach against mitochondrial dysfunction as most everything popularized today contributes to hyper NMDA/Ca+2/calcium activation and magnesium depletion.

Magnesium is also necessary for Ca+2 and Calcium (mineral) REGULATION, meaning it is necessary for a balanced activation and this is implicated in proper immune system function and cellular signaling in the body altogether. It is necessary for the conversion of Cholesterol Sulfate in the skin into the Active Form of Vitamin D from your daily sunlight exposure. It is necessary for proper copper/iron regulation. It is necessary to maintain a proper redox status (your mitochondria and body's ability to deal with stress, inflammation, and oxidative stress/ROS). It is necessary for every detox and repair process within the body. All gene expression for spine or backbone of DNA and the ATP to process the energy and cell wall membrane development uses lots of Magnesium and Phosphorus. Magnesium chloride specifically is the body's primary default salt in which all oral forms of Magnesium are converted to once reacted with hydrochloric acid in the stomach, then diffused throughout the entire body. It is the only form that becomes ionic when dissolved in water and it also functions as a master digestive enzyme due to the increased stomach acid production, although it is extremely alkaline for the body.

With that said, the mitochondria also store Magnesium to protect against reactive oxygen species and other damage as mitochondrial dysfunction is driven by hyper Ca+2 (Calcium) activation, which crashes the mitochondria and almost every cell within the body if allowed to run rampant.

The mitochondria require magnesium to produce ATP and redox signaling molecules (how your cells communicate).  Magnesium is also crucial in helping people with stress, anxiety, seizures, drug/alcohol addiction, and general mental/emotional wellbeing. Until you understand the mineral system and how it affects so many vital functions in the body, you'll be missing a key component in achieving optimal functioning and health. Lactate is necessary for the proper uptake of Magnesium into the mitochondria, which implies the ketogenic diet and exercise to muscle soreness are the optimal ways to achieve this, although  Magnesium literally regenerates the brain (receptors, synapses, neurons, etc.) via neurogenesis.   Magnesium increases the neurotrophic factor, BDNF, and has similar antidepressant pharmacology to ketamine, apart from the more complex mechanisms

Your personal need to consume magnesium is related to your personal level of physical efforts, food consumption, and stress that you have to deal with in a day.  It is wise to find the highest dose of magnesium to personal indicator as you can functionally manage. This means you will want to find your, what is known as a bowel flush level, and maintain just below it. Optimal intake as portrayed by Mildred Seelig, Ph.D. and Carolyn Dean, MD is about 5-10mg ELEMENTAL Magnesium per pound of body weight. For reference, the two primary forms I recommend are 14% elemental Mg by weight for Magnesium glycinate, but this can be rounded down to 10% to make the math equation more simple for you, and 25% elemental Mg per weight for Magnesium chloride. So as an example, someone who is 100lbs would consume 5000mg of Magnesium glycinate throughout the day. However, it is best to consume multiple forms with multiple routes of administration for the best saturation of the entire body. With healthy kidneys, you really can’t get “too much magnesium”.  Oral over-dose just flushes the intestines.  And the body uses it up fast every day in every process that requires ATP or energy.

As another example, I am around 150 lb give or take, and I consume around 10-15g of Magnesium in multiple forms on a daily basis. To put this into perspective, I have 400mg Magnesium glycinate with 200mg L-theanine upon waking, another 400/200mg after breakfast, and 1000/1000mg about 30-60 min. before sleep. Then I also have around 1/2 tsp (2.5g) Magnesium chloride per liter of water that I drink, and I have around 4-6 liters per day. I apply the topical Magnesium chloride spray before my first walk in the morning to catch the sunrise, which enables proper vitamin D synthesis, and again before and after I lift weights in the evening.

If you experience any itchiness or skin irritation when applying the topical Magnesium chloride solution, this is an indication of high Candida wastes excretion and subsides over time as your body becomes repleted and when you stop eating that Refined Sucrose, Bread/Cereals/Pastries/Pastas, and drinking Alcohol. In the meantime, you can keep a cool damp rag on hand to wipe the salt off the area and neutralize that itchiness/irritation immediately.

If you are just starting Magnesium supplementation, you will want to start slow and low with about 400mg Mg glycinate orally or 1/4-1/2 tsp Mg chloride in drinking water and see how you respond. If you do not experience a bowel flush, you may gradually increase dosage as you feel comfortable until you hit that goal intake per lb of body weight. If you immediately a bowel flush, it is likely you are deficient in thiamine (vitamin B1), sodium, and/or potassium, in which case topical application and having any oral Magnesium with fiber intake would be recommended. You can get your thiamine and transketolase levels tested via blood, and RBC Potassium and RBC Sodium are preferable to serum in blood tests because serum levels only become dysregulated with kidney damage, insulin resistance, and mitochondrial dysfunction. You can also verify with a hair tissue mineral analysis to analyze excretion rates in the body to get an idea for a full picture. Directlabs.com will cover all of these tests.

You ought to be on 2-6 different forms of Magnesium to fully support and saturate the body. Particularly Magnesium Glycinate and Magnesium Chloride, but Taurate, Malate, Threonate can also be useful. Until you reach the full saturation situation, it will significantly shift off whatever is thriving in the acidic environment (Magnesium is extremely alkaline) to induce alkalinity to make it really unpleasant and unhappy for whatever reason that is in the acidic environment. It will also change your overall cleanse detox capacity, so any discomfort will subside over time.

Spreading out your dosages is going to be significantly important, but also your MAIN high dose should be reserved for before sleep as this is when almost every cleanse detox and repair process occurs. Your daytime doses can be about 1/10th of your nighttime dose, maybe 3-5 times throughout the day, but also important to have especially each time there is FOOD involved.

I get questions about the differences between each form of magnesium and their purposes often, so here is a short cheat sheet to each form.

It is important to know that all forms of magnesium cross the blood brain barrier due to the separation into pure magnesium ion during digestion which reacts with hydrochloric acid in the stomach to form magnesium chloride. Magnesium chloride is THE tissue salt that all oral forms of magnesium are converted into. It is also important to know the magnesium ion’s usage and absorption in the body is wherever the molecule it’s attached to is used in the body. For example...

Magnesium oxide - essentially magnesium rust, shouldn’t want rust in your body. Second to lowest bioavailability, only really useful for systemic saturation when paired with another form

Magnesium citrate - citric acid/citrate goes into citric acid cycle or energy production. Lowest bioavailability, best avoided due to citrate’s negative impact on ceruloplasmin enzyme activity, fatigue relief, anti-constipation

Magnesium glycinate - Glycine is active nearly everywhere in body. Brain, nervous system, muscles, liver, bones, tendons, etc. Fuels gene expression and glutathione production. Calming and relaxing, can be like rocket fuel for GABA production when paired with l-theanine, combination also facilitates brain waste clearance mechanism during sleep

Magnesium chloride - THE tissue salt. Donates one chloride molecule when reacted with cell which opens channels to allow Magnesium directly into cells. Can be administered orally and topically, soaking back of head and neck with topical solution carries magnesium directly into brain stem to calm entire brain and nervous system

Magnesium acetate - converts into magnesium bicarbonate in the body (liver and muscles), acetate/acetic acid goes into citric acid cycle/energy production, so excellent for acidity/inflammation and fatigue

Magnesium bicarbonate - like MgCl, donates one bicarbonate molecule to mitochondria to open up for magnesium uptake into mitochondria. Chloride, bicarbonate, and sulfate are the forms found in nature, only found in water form for oral consumption, can be made with magnesium hydroxide and Plain carbonated water

Magnesium hydroxide - poor bioavailability, only really useful for flushing the bowels (milk of magnesia) and forming magnesium bicarbonate when paired with seltzer water

Magnesium taurate - taurine. Taurine’s function is brain, nervous system, liver, muscles again. Doubly inhibitory (GABA power), while also useful for calming the heart, hormone production from cholesterol, fat/protein digestion, etc.

Magnesium malate - malate/Malic acid, goes into citric acid cycle/energy production so excellent for fatigue and muscle aches specifically. Note: malate converts into oxaloacetate in the body, which acts as a glutamate scavenger, so can be good for glutamate management

Magnesium threonate - heavily marketed as only form that crosses blood brain barrier, though this is false like previously mentioned. Useful as a nootropic

Magnesium aspartate - low bioavailability, aspartate is an excitatory amino acid and really eliminates the calming/inhibitory purpose of magnesium. I never recommend it for any reason

Magnesium sulfate - sulfate/sulfur. Excellent for detox and skin health, shouldn’t be consumed orally, but topical is fine. Doesn’t saturate the body the same as magnesium chloride topical, it is pissed out 40 min after your bath with sulfate bound toxins.
