The SUCROSE molecule is an addictive poison stimulant, seriously depleting the immune system and creating widespread imbalance and degeneration in the brain and nervous system. It produces the worst cellular waste in the biology, called Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide Hydride, or NADH, which pushes you out of ketosis, therein crashing gene expression and leaving one debilitated. Foggy and fatigued.

NADH is the greatest inflammatory marker in the body, and if for any reason inflammation is an issue, Sucrose is always the worst contributing factor. It will never resolve until sucrose is eliminated from the diet entirely. Remove it from your vocabulary.

Functioning Quinone genetics are required to transform that NADH to NAD+, so the MTHFR cycle can produce Cysteine, Glutathione, Superoxide Dismutase (SOD), and then Metallothionein. With this in mind, Sucrose ultimately stops all of these immune system  and detox processes. Thymoquinone from Nigella sativa (Black Seed) Oil, drives fast conversion of NADH to NAD+ via it's extensive pharmacology, and then all those biological processes are functioning properly again.

Sucrose elevates glutamate/calcium, dopamine, insulin, then aromatase via ghrelin/leptin, so estrogen as well.

Sucrose depletes the biology’s natural defense against most all inflammation and oxidative stress: Magnesium. Magnesium is alkaline, and thus directly counters the acidic Ph level of everything. All wastes of the body are acidic, as are oxidative wastes. Magnesium is the biggest detox agent in the entire biology, so every single activity/process and every form of waste created ALL depend on magnesium to make it happen, as well as being required to eliminate the waste, to begin with!

Knowing this, Magnesium is what the body uses to protect against elevated glutamate and calcium activation, creating excess free glutamate levels in the brain and nervous system, which also results in oxidative stress and thus inflammation, and eventually excitotoxicity and cell death.

Dopamine in excess also creates neurotoxic metabolites (3, 4- dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde (DOPAL), a highly reactive aldehyde species, and Hydrogen Peroxide (H2O2) when metabolized by Monoamine Oxidase (MAO) and Catechol-O-Methyltransferase (COMT) enzymes. Chronic sucrose consumption downregulates the function of global dopamine receptors, so these toxic metabolites are more prone to bioaccumulation in the liver as there are fewer and fewer receptors to maintain functional transmission.

Degeneration of these dopamine receptors eventually leads to Parkinson’s disease and other neurodegenerative diseases, as well as making one more prone to compulsive behavior, such as drug abuse, gambling, sex, etc., and emotional reactivity or outlash, before this occurs. This dopamine excess in turn upregulates Kappa opioid receptors and Dynorphin production, which inhibits GABA, resulting in more excitotoxic excess free glutamate. Dynorphin also inhibits dopamine, so chronic consumption leads to one seeking more of this exogenous dopamine (Sucrose) because one feels so down. Dynorphin is the opposite of Endorphins, which regulate mood, the immune system, physical/emotional pain perception, and much more. It also makes one much more prone to NUMEROUS psychiatric disorders, while greatly exacerbating present disorders. Dynorphin in excess causes one to feel fearful, anxious, and hopeless.

Chronic hyperinsulinemia is neurotoxic in and of itself via glucose excess, while further depleting magnesium. This obviously has a widespread negative physiological impact, such as diabetes, Alzheimer's, cancers, osteoporosis, etc.

Sucrose increases leptin, which increases Aromatase production. Aromatase is the enzyme that metabolizes Testosterone into Estradiol, then to Estrogen as 2-Hydroxy-Estrone, then as unhealthy 4-Hydroxy-Estrone, and then cancer-inducing 16-Hydroxy-Estrone biowaste, creating excess estrogen levels as the waste accumulates when the organs are unable to keep up with toxin burden. This results in mood swings, anxiety, OCD behavior, exacerbation of psychiatric disorders, irritability, hypersensitivity, etc.

Chronic sucrose consumption also contributes to Candida albicans fungus overgrowth in the gut microbiome, which results in widespread inflammation and thus oxidative stress in the brain, gut, and systemically. Candida should only survive at the beginning of the small intestine, where the stomach opens to move stomach contents into the intestine. If for whatever reason, Candida enters the bloodstream, it also travels to the brain and possibly gets through the blood-brain barrier to set up fungus home in the brain. Increased inflammation increases blood-brain barrier permeability for large molecules to enter, where normally the brain would filter them out effectively. This creates the perfect variables for disease and toxicity induction.

In the BRAIN, Candida AMPS UP your cravings for its food supply: simple carbs, sucrose, etc., which in turn, exacerbates SUCROSE ADDICTION. Candida is also capable of signaling the brain with cravings via the enteric nervous system in the gut. Then the individual eats more sucrose and carbs. THIS is the reason why people consume more sucrose, which is the reason they uptake more into the bloodstream, NOT because there is a direct increase in absorption of the same amount of sucrose being consumed. This eventually leads to a leaky gut, which opens up the biology to all SORTS of disease and further toxicity by almost everything you consume. Candida overgrowth and gut inflammation lead to enhanced sucrose absorption, leading to an even worse impact on health, not to mention insulin resistance over time. Gut Inflammation enlarges stomach membrane pores that then allow large molecules to move directly into the bloodstream before being fully broken down. This is not proper absorption.

The detail on absorption is especially essential here, and absorption really implies intake to cells where the substance can be utilized. Fruits and SOME complex carb food sources contain fibers and antioxidant, antidiabetic, as well as anti-inflammatory, constituents that mitigate the inherently toxic effects of sucrose (isolated fructose/glucose) and modulate glucose metabolism, so the biology is better able to utilize the available glucose with less chance of hyperinsulinemia. Nuance is absolutely important here because high glycemic index fruits override this toxicity mitigation and you may as well be consuming sucrose. Digestibility also plays a role here, take bananas for example. They spike insulin/blood glucose levels because their starchy nature is digested near immediately, then the crash is inevitable.

ALL CARBS (simple carbs and complex carbs, like soluble fiber), work on ghrelin/leptin to affect Aromatase. Simple carbs break down much faster when compared to complex carbs, and go on to high nutritional cofactor burn much faster with a high metabolic waste output of NADH. NADH gets HIGH, it crashes ketosis and then gene expression entirely.

Long/complex carbs, like soluble fiber, survive past the upper intestine home of Candida fungus and makes it to the large colon for those bacteria to digest it, and thus very slowly releases SIMPLE carbs for slow-burn fuel and a pace of waste that does not overwhelm cellular metabolism. This is the nuance most everyone doesn’t seem to understand when it comes to carb intake.
