# Vision / Eyesight

To put it simply, the primary causes of degenerated vision are artificial blue light toxicity, lack of sunlight especially at sunrise, midday, and sunset, malnutrition, advanced glycation end-products/insulin resistance (refined sucrose and industrialized vegetable/seed oil intake), inflammation, oxidative stress, and dysfunctional dopamine, acetylcholine, and GABA/glutamate. I fell into every single one of these factors and my eyes continued to degenerate more and more each year,

It started with my noticing that I didn't require glasses while under the influence of LSD and ketamine back in 2017-2018. I was able to see the individual leaves on trees, but I never made this connection and of course, I didn't believe it was even possible to reverse. So I got curious and began to reverse engineer the pharmacology involved and the major contributing factors involved were anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and dopamine, acetylcholine, and GABA/glutamate activity.

I am very mindful of my body and at this point, I had maximized my memory capability, so I noted down each factor of my routines that lead to the restoration of my vision. I was experimenting with many things, but have been able to reproduce these effects after intentionally beginning to degenerate my eyes again with excessive artificial blue light during the day and after sunset, as well as repeating it in a small handful of others who are noticing improvements in their vision as well after lifelong glasses/contacts prescriptions. It was a very gradual process over the period of 1-2 years and I believe that is only because of me not knowing what the hell I was doing at the time.

It started with the zero-tolerance dietary framework and restoring my gut function, reducing gut and brain/eye inflammation to baseline. As I've mentioned in other protocols, gut inflammation leads to systemic inflammation altogether. I had severe leaky gut most of my life in retrospect and I noticed improvements in clarity of vision as I began to restore this. My diet was specifically ketogenic or carnivore, though I am not positive this is absolutely necessary. The zero-tolerance dietary framework is, not ALL carbs altogether (depending on the status of your gut). Very similar to what it is now, but with near-zero carbs aside from the daily grapefruit. Not even raw honey or rice.

My mentor had begun to tell me to start seeing the sunrise and sunset every single day. He didn't explain why beyond vitamin D production, but I later realized this was one of the primary factors in restoring vision altogether. Now, I was fortunate to already be living in Arizona where it is sunny most of the year, but if you are not as fortunate, either vacationing, moving, or reducing artificial blue light to near zero may be necessary for this process. I would like to hear reports from you all regardless to narrow down on exactly what restored it, though I have a very concrete idea of what did it that I am sharing with you all now. I had severe insomnia at the time due to the brain injury, but the sunlight was powerful enough to overcome this. I would be up late on the phone or laptop screen, or watching television, which I've now identified as one of the factors that made the restoration take so long with as many ups and downs as I experienced throughout the process. This was also before I found out about the utility of blue-blocking glasses. This is how I began to degenerate my vision again recently, was staying up late with my wife, watching a bright LED television. I was going on weekend hikes up nearby mountains (high elevation) and would forego my glasses because I would inevitably take a psychedelic entheogen like LSD, psilocybin and analogs, or ayahuasca. I always made sure to look in the direction of the sun throughout these hikes because that's what felt best to me, it felt like it was energizing my body and spirit, which it turns out it absolutely was. Aside from this, I went on 2-3 daily walks around the neighborhood when the sun was up. I experimented with sun gazing, though I'm not sure this is absolutely necessary. Timing is CRUCIAL for this to avoid further damage, EARLY sunrise and LATE sunset when UV light was lowest or absent was when I would experiment with this. I did not continue this practice out of concern for further damage to my eyes. Always without my glasses, I would rely on the blurry outlines, muscle memory, and my profound hearing ability to avoid vehicles though in this residential area, I never ran into any issues. Even just sitting outside in the backyard or on the porch in the direction of the sun without glasses or contacts should be sufficient, at each important time of day if this is what you feel safest doing.

Minimizing your screen time is crucial to this process. I stopped watching television altogether, and I would only use my phone or laptop in short bursts. Now, I would also recommend the blue-light blocking glasses for any screen time to further minimize any damage it causes. For the phones, set up a red light filter and try to keep screen brightness to a minimum, and for laptops, download the program Iris to minimize blue light and screen flicker. I was using f.lux at the time but it has no impact on flicker which is also damaging, and I've noted the Iris program is much more customizable and feels better on the eyes. I would never go without it on any computer screen anymore.

Take off your glasses, contacts, or sunglasses any time you are able to exercise your eyes and expose them to the full light spectrum, especially while you are outside in the sun. I assumed I didn't have to mention obviously wear them when necessary, like driving or work, but just in case, PLEASE wear them if you need to. Lmfao. Reddit, am I right?

As for exercising your eyes, I was intuitively staring at far distances for a short period, say 5-10 minutes, before shifting my focus to the ground or something else nearby. I don't recall exactly what part of the eyes this trains, but it is like exercise for the eyes and was later confirmed to be a major factor in another myopia protocol. I would do this on all of my hikes and walks, this is also as crucial as sunlight is.

Now for the specific nutrients, I had noted seafood/fish, goat milk/kefir, eggs, and cod/beef liver had the greatest impact on my vision. I later identified it to be caused by DHA (this is crucial to replenishing and regenerating your eyes as artificial blue light/nnEMF, refined sucrose, and industrialized vegetable/seed oils DESTROYS the DHA present), retinol (vitamin A in animal foods), vitamin C (from fruits), vitamin D (from sunlight and cod liver, never supplemented it during this period), multiform magnesium saturation (chloride and glycinate was all I was supplementing during this period, glycine has an additional protective effect on the eyes), zinc (from red meats, oysters, and soaked/sprouted pumpkin seeds), choline (from eggs with yolks, cooked or raw doesn't matter), taurine (from raw seafood/shellfish), glycine (from seafood/shellfish, cod liver, Mg glycinate, and the occasional isolated glycine here and there), thiamine (from pork, fish, and supplementing HCL and benfotiamine, latter having additional AGEs protection benefit), riboflavin (from meats, organs, eggs, and goat milk/kefir), niacin (same as riboflavin with occasional low dose supplement in nicotinic acid form), folate (same as riboflavin, but including fermented vegetables), and B12 (same as taurine and riboflavin). I will include studies below supporting each one of the nutrient cofactors, but if you observe the composition of the eye and how it functions, you must supply nutrients in a surplus format for the body to pull from when healing itself, this goes for any injury or degeneration.

Artificial light at night and oxidative stress, in general, formed the oxidized aldehyde form of retinol, RETINAL, that is used in photoreceptors as retinal has the light emission spectrum that DHA absorbs as a chromophore . The free aldehyde retinal that is released with photoreceptor degradation oxidizes DHA and is what primarily destroys the eyes over time. This isn't to say consume zero retinol/vitamin A, but make sure your biological environment and light environment are fit to utilize it properly.

Oxalate may or may not play a role here, and reduction or elimination altogether may be important in this process as accumulation and mechanical inflammation/damage has been found in the eyes.

Deficiency in any of these nutrients will prevent any restoration from occurring, so vegan/vegetarian/plant-based diets are totally out the window on this one as with most health conditions.

I do believe copper-iron metabolism dysregulation plays a major role here as well, which I have highlighted how to manage in my Unbound Iron Detox protocol here on Patreon. I haven't confirmed this with any studies, but it accumulates in the brain so I can safely assume there's a connection here as it was a factor I was addressing during this process and for the fact that aside from artificial blue light and nnEMF, it is the greatest source of oxidative stress and inflammation in every human being.

I was practicing pranayama (breathwork) on a daily basis during this period, specifically ujjayi breathing. I've been doing this since my brother and grandmother taught me at age 10, but I figured I'd mention it just in case it did play a role. Simply breathing incorrectly through the mouth especially and remaining in a sympathetic nervous system state constantly has a massively degenerative and inflammatory impact on the entire body, including every organ. Practice pranayama. It doesn't have to be all day long like I was doing, but at LEAST 10-30 minutes out of your day. You can do this while doing other tasks, like a walk for example.

As for herbal medicines, the ones I was consuming in varying amounts were as follows, in order of importance (I don't believe dosage is as important as simply consuming these to account for inflammation, oxidative stress, and dysfunctional dopamine, acetylcholine, and GABA/glutamate activity, restoring repair processes within the body, and preventing further degeneration):

- Black seed oil
- Lion's mane extract
- Blue lotus
- Microdose Peganum harmala (contraindicated in those on anti-depressant and stimulant pharmaceutical medications)
- Bacopa
- Polygala tenuifolia (contraindicated in those on anti-depressant and stimulant pharmaceutical medications)
- Gotu kola
- Astragalus
- Oat straw
- Magnolia bark

I replicated the pharmacology of LSD and ketamine without the psychoactivity with this combination of herbs effectively, and it played a major role in the gradual improvements I was seeing until I started to realize actually wearing my glasses made my vision poorer and I could see better without them altogether. There was a short period of not seeing the BEST, but it was very shortly after this before now having that same clarity I would have on LSD and ketamine totally sober. I could see the leaves on trees, I could see writing in a book or on a screen, it was such a remarkable process to observe first-hand.
