I've been visiting my wife and daughter (and friends and business partner on occasion) every month to every other month recently since last year and have encountered issues with the negative impact of frequent flying and jet lag. To summarize the extensive impact, it really comes down to circadian dysregulation from shifting time zones at such a rapid rate, and the extreme nnEMF and cosmic radiation the body is exposed to in the plane.

I would experience significant fatigue where I couldn't help but sleep most of the day and often falling asleep while busy, gut and digestion issues (diarrhea and fatigue after eating), and I would just look like crap visually. You could see it in my face. I have since identified ways to counter this impact, which I will summarize below. I always try to arrive early before evening or sunset, but before 10 PM at the very latest depending on what fly-in times are available. I prefer my flights earlier than later for this reason, so I can catch those last sunrays and begin to readjust my circadian rhythm immediately. Flying east seems to have the most significantly negative impact on the body if you live on the west coast, whereas flying back home west was much less of an issue.

-Opt for pat-down at the cancer security scanner
- Opt for an aisle seat so I can get up and move around/stretch to keep blood circulating, including using the restroom for the following tip
- Try to get a walk in before I leave for the airport and catch the sunrise if I have enough time and schedule permits
- 1/2-1 liter ice cold spring water every hour or two of the flight (I make sure I get to the airport early enough to grab 3-4 bottles because I drink a lot of water to begin with, cold is best for the impact on EZ water and cellular hydration)
- I bring a bag of labeled Magnesium chloride flakes with me on my flights, but I believe it depends which airport you're flying from on whether or not it will be confiscated, and include 1/2 tsp to every ice cold bottle of water for Ca+2 mitigation (nnEMF)
- 100mg Ubiquinol (CoQ10) every hour of the flight to keep the cytochromes running smoothly and to provide additional electrons for the electron transport chain. I also have an extra capsule before sleep the night before, and another upon waking.
- 1/2-1 tsp Magnesium chloride, 1/2 tsp Myoinositol, 250mg-1/4 tsp Inositol hexaphosphate (IP6) dissolved in 1-1 1/2 liter ice cold water on my way to the airport before I get through security (this provides Mg-ATP via the phosphates and Mg combination, while protecting from Ca+2 hyperactivation from nnEMF and cosmic radiation and to induce autophagy via IP6)
- 400mg Magnesium glycinate and 200mg L-theanine with breakfast/lunch and another 400/200mg some point on my flight (to mitigate Ca+2 hyperactivation)
- 1 tbsp Black seed oil the night before sleep and another tbsp with breakfast/lunch before leaving for the airport, another tbsp upon arrival if my host provides it for me which they usually do
- Ketosis via high protein/high fat ketogenic diet 1-3 days before and after my flights, and fasting during my flights. I've recently noted just the day before and after is sufficient because I am already fat adapted and my pentose phosphate pathway is functioning optimally
- Eat a raw seafood (DHA/iodine) heavy breakfast or lunch and again for dinner when I land. Another seafood heavy breakfast the next morning after arrival. I usually include an additional source of sulfur (pork/bacon or eggs) to mitigate the heavy blue light on the flight
- Blue light blockers throughout the entire flight and at the airport because the artificial lights used severely impact the circadian rhythm detriment of flying
- If I am unable to catch the sunset upon arrival, I make sure to take a cold shower or run sprints for the autophagy/mitochondrial benefits
- I wear a pair of bamboo boxers and and silver-threaded shirt for additional nnEMF protection on my flight (shirt from lessemf.com, I had the boxers from there as well but it caused a skin reaction from the sweat rubbing against the silver threading)

So it's really quite extensive, and not all of it may be necessary if you are not flying on a frequent basis, but the more you can include without overwhelming yourself before leaving for the airport, the less negative impact you will experience as it does impact everyone whether they're aware of it or not. Make sure to catch the sunset or the next morning's sunrise and to spend as much time in the sun as you can upon arrival, obviously without burning. The seafood is important as well.
