Fundamentally, restoring mitochondrial function means reestablishing reduction-oxidation potential, coherent cellular water formation, and energy metabolism/ATP production. This returns us to what Pollack says in his book: when sunlight hits water, the exclusion zone (EZ water, fourth phase of water, gel-like water in cells that repels toxins and neutralizes ROS properly) forms a negative charge. (The interaction with sunlight is correct, Pollack's explanation has many holes, this is something that will be addressed). This is what mitochondria require in the modern age today, moreso than anything else you can do for your health. It always comes back down to mitochondrial function and the mitochondrial genome (mtDNA).  What do mitochondria make when the organism is exposed to natural full-spectrum light and grounded to bare earth (grounding = inverse hall magnetic spin effect)? It’s water. Coherent cellular water. Cells take glucose, oxygen, and light to turn into carbon dioxide (CO2) and water. This is the reverse of photosynthesis in plants, which takes carbon dioxide, water, and light to make glucose or sugar.  In my perspective, redox (mitochondrial function) comes before detox so that your cells have the energy (ATP) for the methionine/methylation and glutathione cycles (glutathione, superoxide dismutase, catalase, metallothionein, melatonin are the primary examples of reduction-oxidation potential/redox) to function whatsoever. Energy to make the entire biology function, but to also jumpstart healing processes again (autophagy, apoptosis, repair, mitochondrial biogenesis/mitophagy (fusion/fission), neurogenesis/synaptogenesis).

The brain, central nervous system, organs, and muscles have sufficient energy to perform the daily activities required of you without fatigue. Your skin looks youthful and glowing. Your teeth and skeleton are strong and bright, with little to no plaque formation. Diseases and health conditions begin to resolve. It is the true meaning of objectively optimal health.  Inside the mitochondria, the fifth cytochrome is called the ATPase, which is the part of the mitochondria that produce ATP or cellular energy, which should be spinning at a more rapid rate when hydrogen (H+) is put into it in simple terms. In a healthy human being at rest, it has been shown to spin at around 15000 times per second. When a healthy human being is active (exercise, for example), it can increase by up to three times to keep up with the energy demand. When a healthy human being performs cognitive tasks (critical thinking, chess, research, etc.), the same thing as physical activity can happen.

When there is an accumulation of deuterium within the cellular matrix or within the cytosol of the cell, the ATPase spin rate slows down significantly.   Deuterium is the “heavy” hydrogen isotope that has double the atomic mass of hydrogen, while necessary in the growth and development of children, it is being shown to contribute to aging and decreased mitochondrial redox potential (ability to deal with oxidative stress properly = aging and inflammation inherently). It competes with “light” hydrogen on the electron transport chain and slows the ATPase, where even a 5-10+% accumulation over the normal 150ppm in the blood can contribute to mitochondrial dysfunction. It also doesn’t fit properly into the proton channels within the ATPase. 

This occurs because the more technology (nnEMF and artificial blue light) one uses and the further disconnected one gets from nature (sunlight, grounding, water, seasonal eating and weather exposure, etc.), this accumulation occurs which slows down the electron transport chain.  On a clinical level, this can be seen in Magnetoencephalography (MEG data), Electroencephalography (EEG, seen with lower alpha wavelength rate), Electrocardiogram (ECG/EKG), Heart rate variability data (HRV, seen with a fingerprint which appears less chaotic, should be more chaotic, look at chaotic rate vs glucose metabolism, can show blue light/nnEMF toxicity), and Coronary artery calcium score for the heart (CAC, shows arteries allowing calcium efflux into tissue from mitochondrial dysfunction, nnEMF, artificial blue light, hyper calcium-glutamate, etc., showing solar light wavelengths can’t enter through the skin to surface of arteries to release nitric oxide (NO) which should dilate the arteries from UVA light exposure based on latitude and regulate the calcium efflux). 

Sunlight (most notably red/infrared light but also UV light as well), drinking clean spring water from high elevation or the close to the cold North/South poles (deuterium depleted and rich in mineral content for coherent cellular water formation and DC electric current function inherently, there is also deuterium depleted water available which can be pricy but can be useful in latitudes further away from the equator. Still better to form your own deuterium depleted EZ water within your cells) (again, this will likely be corrected, I no longer believe the EZ water theory, this must be reexamined and will be corrected in updated article, replace with coherent cellular water while reading), proper sleep in total darkness, cold thermogenesis, eating a high-fat diet (even non-hydrogenated plant fats are found to have lower deuterium content (i.e. black seed, pumpkin seed, and olive oil), and fasting/ketosis also depletes the body of deuterium and improves mitochondrial function by increasing EZ water formation in cells (deuterium depletion definitely plays a role in mitochondrial energy production as outlined above and in a number of the studies I've shared, although we need to identify if it influences the cellular water at all) 

Fluoride is present primarily in tap water (consider both drinking and bathing water), it competes with iodine meaning it displaces iodine from performing its roles in thyroid status and brain/CNS function. It functions as a dielectric blocker, meaning it “blocks” the DC electric current where it is stored within the body, and the electronegative characteristics of fluoride on the periodic element table make it so that it “steals” electrons and draws them into the core of the molecule. In the context of mitochondrial function, it will indirectly compete with oxygen which is considered a “terminal electron acceptor” in the electron transport chain (ETC). This decreases the Ph and the energy production capability in the cell, inherently decreasing reduction-oxidation potential (redox). You want to ensure you do not include fluoride in your drinking water at all, and it is best to find a shower filter that eliminates most if not all fluoride as well.  Iodine-rich seafood, shellfish, and seaweeds help to compete with fluoride stored in the body and aid in its removal.
