# Ray Peat Masters Thesis

ACCEPTED AMONG THOSE INTELLECTUAL DUALISTS, OF BOTH THE EAST AND THE WEST, WHO REJECT CONSCIOUSNESS ENTIRELY, AND IN SUCH CASES AS THESE, IT IS LARGELY BY THEIR CLAIMS, AND THE CLAIMS OF THE SCHOLARS, THAT THEY CAN BE CONSIDERED MYSTICS. IN THE EMPIRICAL SENSE OF THE WORD, MYSTICISM IS IN SOME WAY ULTIMATELY CONSEQUENTIAL WITH IMAGINATION, AS GODDARD WAS LATER TO PROVE.

THERE IS NO DOUBT THAT THE GERMANIC WORD "MYSTERY" IS RELATED WITH THE WORD "MYTH," AND THAT, IN A VAGUE RESPECT, MYSTICISMS ARE RELATED AS "MYTHS." IT IS ALREADY KNOWN TO ANTHROPOLOGISTS. IT IS ALSO DESCRIBED OF THE CULT OF THE SACRED MUSHROOM, AND IS MENTIONED IN NATURAL AND ARTIFICIAL LANGUAGES, STARTING SIMILARLY TO EUROPEAN LANGUAGES. FOR EXAMPLE, THE ROOT MYO: MEANS "TO SHUT," INSTEAD OF "TO OPEN," IN A NAME OF THE SACRED MUSHROOM, FLY-AGARIC. IT IS THOUGHT BY WASSON, BY CONSTANT, SIMILAR TO THE GREEK MYO AND THE LATIN MUTO. MYO CANNOT BE CLAIMED TO BE MORE THAN A CATECHISM CONCERNING A MEMORABLE CULT WHICH USES THE SACRED MUSHROOM IS CALLED A MYSTERY, WHICH, WHEN USED TO COMMUNICATE CAN COME OUT AT LEAST HAS COLOR AND IN THE STRICTEST SENSE. IT IS KNOWN THAT THE RITE OF SIBERIA, DIVINE MUSHROOM IS KNOWN TO BE USED IN SOPHISTICATED NEW GUINEA, AND MEXICO. AT LEAST ACCORDING TO TRADITION IN ANCIENT JAPAN AND INDIA. BUT ALSO ROLLER, WASSON, GALLAGHER AND REID, WRITE HOW THE MAGIC OF MYSTICISM, BY (MAY, 1957), PP. 100-120. ALSO, ANDREA PULMARION, OF THE SACRED MUSHROOM, CALL TO THE DOOR OF ETERNITY (NEW YORK, 1957), P. 263, SAYS THAT "THERE IS GOOD REASON TO BELIEVE IN THE EXISTENCE OF A SACRED MUSHROOM CULT IN MODERN EGYPT."

1. ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA, (CHICAGO, 1951), VOL. 16, P. 47.
2. JAMES (ED.) ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION, (NEW YORK, 1917), VOL. 8, P. 94. ALSO SEE ON PAGE 7 OF THIS THESIS A SIMILAR STATEMENT CONCERNING THE CLASSICAL POSITION OF ELEUSIS.

SUPPORT IS FOUND IN THE "SONG TO DEMETER," A HOMERIC HYMN, WHERE A PRAYER TO DEMETER (MOTHER EARTH) IS PROBABLY REPRESENTED. "MOTHER EARTH, BUT COME, MY CHILD, AND DO NOT DO ALWAYS UNREPENTINGLY WITH THE BITTER GOD OF CONQUEST, BUT RATHER, NOR ABANDON THE FRUIT THAT GROWS FROM THE SACRED EARTH, AND THE FORBIDDEN DEMETER, WHO LOVES FLOWERS, AND THE SACRED GATEWAY, THEREFORE, TO BRING UP FROM THE EARTH. ALTHOUGH THE SOUL OF CONQUEST REFERS TO MERELY VEGETABLES AND MUSHROOMS, IT SEEMS TO BE A VERY HIDDEN MEANING IN THIS SONG, TO MAKE IT CLEAR THAT IT WAS SOME SORT OF VEGETABLE, OR PLANT THAT WAS GATHERED BY THE CULTIVATOR ON THE SACRED NIGHT, AND THAT WAS CARRIED BACK TO A GOD, AND THAT IT WOULD BE TAKEN BY SACRED RITUALS BETWEEN THE GODS AND TO THE KINGS WHO BEAR HIS SCEPTER, TRIPTOLEMUS AND DIOCLES. THE WORDS "SACRED GATEWAY" AND "TO DODGE THE EUMOLPIDS" DESCRIBE A SACRED PATH. SHE SHOWED THE SACRED RITES. ALTHOUGH THIS MYSTERY IS TO TRIPTOLEMUS AND HIS. THE HOMERIC HYMNS AND HOMER TRANSLATED BY HUGH G. EVELYN-WHITE (NEW YORK; 1914) II P. 33.

1. ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA (CHICAGO, 1951), VOL. 16, P. 47. THEY HAVE, FROM THE SACRED CHEST, HAVING
2. JAMES (ED.) ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION, (NEW YORK, 1917), P. 102.

AND POLYXENUS AND DIOCLES ALSO; ... ALWAYS A MYSTERY WHICH NO ONE MAY IN ANY WAY TRANSGRESS OR PRY INTO, FOR KEEPING A SECRET OF THE GODS. VOL. I. ALTHOUGH THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION HAS THIS, THAT CICERO SAYS, ATHENS PRODUCED "NOTHING OTHER THAN THE MYSTERIES OF ELEUSIS, NOT ONLY IN REGARD TO THE ORDERING AND MAINTAINING OF THEM, BUT IN REGARD TO THE FURNISHING OF A GOOD HOPE IN DEATH." AND THAT SOPHOCLES SAID, "HAPPINESS IN THE NEXT WORLD WAS CONFINED TO THOSE WHO HAD BEEN INITIATED IN THE MYSTERIES OF ELEUSIS, THAT IS, PROBABLY, SO FAR AS THEIR RELIGIOUS BELIEFS WERE CONCERNED. THE "SONG TO DEMETER" DOES NOT ACTUALLY IMPLY A DOCTRINE OF "AFTER-LIFE" TO THE MYSTERIES; "HAPPY IS HE AMONG MEN ON EARTH WHO HAS SEEN THESE MYSTERIES; BUT HE WHO IS UNINITIATED AND WHO HAS NO PART IN THEM, NEVER SHALL HE JOIN GOOD THINGS UNDER THE EARTH." UPON THIS STATEMENT, IT SEEMS, ONE IS SURPASSED TO REPRESENT EITHER A DENIAL OF ETERNITY FOR THOSE WHO ARE NOT INITIATED, WITH NO REFERENCE TO THE FUTURE OF THE NEXT LIFE OR A STATEMENT THAT THE INITIATED WILL HAVE A SUPERIOR AFTERLIFE.

1. EVELYN-WHITE, HOMERIC HYMNS AND HOMER, P. 33.
2. JAMES (ED.) ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION, (NEW YORK, 1917), P. 102.

DIFFERENTLY. THE FACT THAT BUDDHISM HAS A GREATER REPUTATION FOR BEING MONISTIC THAN HINDUISM IS REVEALED BY THE STATEMENT IN THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES THAT BUDDHISM HAS SPREAD INTO AREAS WHICH HAD PREVIOUSLY BEEN CHRISTIAN, TAOIST, ZOROASTRIAN, AND EVEN BRAHMANIST BECAUSE OF ITS PRACTICAL NATURE, ITS GOALS BEING PRIMARILY HUMANITARIAN, AND PSYCHOLOGY BEING THE MEANS USED TO ACHIEVE THEM. ACCORDING TO THE DEFINITION GIVEN BY THE ABOVE, BUDDHISM CAN BE CONSIDERED TO BE A MYSTICAL RELIGION, MAKING USE OF SUCH PRACTICES AS "ECSTASY," "TRANCE," AND "CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE ABSOLUTE," SO IT CAN BE SEEN THAT BOTH OF THESE STATEMENTS ABOUT BUDDHISM CAN BE SIMULTANEOUSLY CORRECT, IF THE MENTIONED "PRACTICES" ARE UNDERSTOOD IN A MONISTIC SENSE, AND, IF "HUMANITARIAN" IS NOT DEFINED TOO NARROWLY. THE MONISTIC BUDDHIST MIGHT SAY THAT THROUGH CERTAIN TRANCES, OR PRACTICES, MAN CAN, IF ACCORDING WITH THE FOUR NOBLE TRUTHS, OVERCOME IGNORANCE, AND THEREBY BECOME AWARE OF THE HIGHEST TRUTH AND EXPERIENCE THE PUREST DELIGHT, MAHAPARINIRVANA. THE PERSON WHO DESIRES TO OVERCOME HIS IGNORANCE, THAT IS, TO BE "INITIATED," NEED ONLY, AS IN THE PARALLEL HINDU AND GREEK ELEUSINIAN RITES, BE INITIATED, WHO ABSTAINS FROM INJURY AND STEALING, THE TRUTH OF PAIN, (2) TRUTH OF THE CAUSE OF PAIN, (3) TRUTH OF CESSATION OF PAIN, AND (4) THE TRUTH OF THE PATH THAT LEADS TO THE CESSATION OF PAIN.

1. ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES, (NEW YORK, 1949) (1) THE TRUTH OF PAIN, (2) THE TRUTH OF THE CAUSE OF PAIN, (3) THE TRUTH OF CESSATION OF PAIN, AND (4) THE TRUTH OF THE PATH THAT LEADS TO THE CESSATION OF PAIN.

THAT IS, COMMONERS AND SLAVES WERE NOT EXCLUDED, AND COULD EVEN BECOME GURUS OR TEACHERS OF THE RELIGION.

THE "METAPHYSICAL" EXPLANATION OF THIS ASPECT OF BUDDHISM IS GIVEN BY ZIMMER AS FOLLOWS: "FOR COMPASSION IS OF THE ESSENCE OF THE BODHISATTVA AND IS CONNECTED WITH HIS RIGHT PERCEPTION OF THE VOID, OR AS ONE MIGHT SAY, IT IS THE PRIMARY REFLEX OF THE VOID, FOR THE BODHISATTVA, AFTER HIS OWN SELF-ENLIGHTENMENT, WITHIN THE HEART OF ALL CREATURES, COMPASSION IS PRESENT AS THE SIGN OF THEIR POTENTIAL BUDDHAHOOD. FOR ALL THINGS ARE SUNYATA; THE VOID, AND ITS PURE REFLEX OF THE VOID (WHICH IS ITSELF ESSENTIAL BEING), IS COMPASSION. COMPASSION (KARUNA) LEADS TO THE TOTAL UNITY OF ALL THINGS. IT MANIFESTS JUST AS IT WITHHOLDS THE BODHISATTVA FROM NIRVANA."

1. ZIMMER, PHILOSOPHIES OF INDIA, P. 578.
2. ZIMMER USES "VOID" TO MEAN "NOTHINGNESS" AND "ANNIHILATES" IN THE VOID TO MEAN "NOTHING IN THEM THE ESSENCE (OR EXISTENCE) OR ATTRIBUTES) PERCEIVING PARTICULAR OBJECTS. IT SEEMS A CRITIC THAT IT IS THIS TYPE OF VOID WHICH, ACCORDING TO THE COMMON WESTERN CONCEPTION THAT BUDDHISM IS NEGATIVE; HOWEVER, IT WILL BE SEEN THAT THIS NEGATIVE IS A DIRECT RESULT OF ITS MONISTIC DOCTRINE. IT REJECTS NOTHING IN THE UNIVERSE BUT IGNORANCE AND UNCONSCIOUSNESS, AND HIS "HIGHEST GOAL" IS THE UNDERSTANDING OF AN INFINITE NOTHINGNESS UNIVERSALLY IN WHICH THE HIGHEST REALITY IS THE MAN WHO PERCEIVES IT.

3. ZIMMER, PHILOSOPHIES OF INDIA, P. 557.
4. IT IS IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT ALL OF THOSE WHO ADVOCATE AN EXTREMELY MONISTIC MYSTICAL DOCTRINE MAINTAIN THAT "OMNISCIENCE" IS CHARACTERISTIC OF THE PERSON WHO HAS ATTAINED THIS GOAL, OR OF THIS PERSON'S ADOPTED FORM OF CONSCIOUSNESS. THE HIMALAYAN MYSTICS, THE HINDUS, THE BUDDHISTS, BEING DISCUSSED HERE, AND BLAKE, WHO SAID, "LESS THAN ALL," CANNOT BE SAID, "MAN" (ANTHONY, GEORGE, POETRY AND PROSE OF WILLIAM BLAKE (LONDON, 1948), P. 136.) IS ALL. (LONDON, 1948), P. 136.)

SINCE THE ONE WHO ATTAINS SUCH KNOWLEDGE MUST BEHAVE LIKE ONE WHO HAS ALREADY ATTAINED A PROGRAMMATIC SACRAMENTAL BECAUSE OF THE BOUNDS THAT NORMALLY STAND AS THE LIMITS OF REALITY WAS CAREFULLY UNDERTAKEN IN CERTAIN SCHOOLS OF THE MAHAYANA. IN SPITE OF ALL THE SCANDAL THAT HAS BEEN CAUSED CONCERNING THIS PRIMITIVE BUDDHIST WORSHIP, A MAJORITY OF THE
