# Inflammation Endotoxin Estrogen And Other Problems

Ray Peat's Newsletter
Not for republication without written permission.
Copyright 2005
Raymond Peat P.O. Box 5764 Eugene OR 97405
To the wicked, everything serves as pretext.
- Voltaire
March 2006

Inflammation, endotoxin, estrogen, and other problems

Over the last few decades, the meaning of inflammation has changed a little, from being thought of simply as an essential part of the immune reaction, to being recognized as something that can interfere with the immune system, and that contributes to chronic disease and degeneration. Many components of the inflammatory reaction have been identified lately, but the way those fit into the context of the whole organism still isn't clear.

Many of the "evolutionary interpretations" of particular biological features are just words, empty speculations that can't be tested. (Selective breeding experiments and comparative physiology can provide some basis for arguments about the evolution of the immune system, but the people who created the "big picture" weren't burdened by a need for detailed evidence.)

Developmental processes, however, have been studied in great detail, and as information accumulates, it is becoming clear that the traditional view of inflammation has little to do with reality. When inflammation is "explained" as something that evolved to protect the organism against infection, people will be taught that theory, and will feel no need to think about the subject again.

With the newer realization that inflammation can lead to cancer, heart disease, diabetes, dementia, and other degenerative processes, the logical seeming course of action for people taught the traditional "evolutionary" view of inflammation has been to look for the infectious organism causing the problem.

But if we put inflammation into the developmental context, it is immediately clear that infectious agents are just one of the many factors that we interact with and that can be involved in the inflammatory and degenerative processes. Nutrition, toxins, environmental stresses, and biological cycles influence the way we react to infectious organisms, and even in the absence of virulent organisms, can cause inflammation and degeneration. In the uterus and ovary, for example, inflammatory and degenerative changes are part of normal functioning.

In those organs, the cyclic changes in structure are orchestrated to a monthly rhythm that makes them very obvious. But in other organs, such as the adrenal cortex, the intestinal epithelium, the liver, and the skin, there is a continuous process of renewal (and degeneration) of cells that is fairly well known, despite the dogmatists who want to cling to the "Hayflick limit," that denies the existence of a flowing renewal of cells in every organ, or that insists that no renewal is possible after 50 divisions of a cell line. Cell renewal occurs even in the brain and the heart. The Hayflick doctrine was plausible to people who were committed to a Weismannist view of genetics and development, a view that radically denied the role of organismic and environmental interactions in development.

Cells that are well insulated from the environment can live for a very long time, but cells that directly contact the environment, i.e., the skin and the intestinal epithelium, divide rapidly, and are shed.

When stimulation is great, and energy supply is weak, a cell will either adapt to the conditions, sometimes increasing its rate of division, or die. Nerve cells can protect themselves by becoming insensitive to stimulation; in some cases, the stress-induced loss of its axon can probably turn a nerve cell into a resting, or stem, cell.

The dissolution of a cell releases its materials in different ways, according to the conditions that caused it to die. Sometimes it releases histamine and other substances that can increase blood flow in nearby capillaries, but under other conditions it can liquefy without causing much change in its environment. When a significant amount of cellular debris accumulates in an area, wandering cells sense it, and depending on the nature of the injury, they may simply remove the debris, or stay and adapt, forming part of a repair structure.

Proteolytic enzymes and nucleases can decompose most of the structural proteins and nucleic acids, but the lipases that act on the dead cell's structural lipids release a variety of modified phospholipids, fatty acids, and cholesterol, with considerable biological activity or significance. These substances appear with regularity when cells are being damaged, and they are the most important class of signals acting on the immune system. Oxidized phospholipids can cause other cells to form a variety of substances that amplify the alarm signal (e.g., Kadl, et al., 2002). Their importance justifies the view of J. Cunliffe and P. Matzinger, that the immune system is actually a system of structural development and maintenance, and that its role in killing alien organisms is triggered when tissue damage releases our intrinsic signal substances.

Polyunsaturated fatty acids, derived from foods, have a special role in the immune system, intensifying the effects of stress (cholesterol newsletter, September, 2005) in killing lymphocytes, and blocking the proliferative response of thymic cells (Rotondo, et al., 1994). They tend to shift immune functions from cellular immunity to humoral (antibody) immunity, and this pattern predisposes to autoimmunity. They are probably directly toxic to the liver (Ritskes-Hoitinga, 1998). DHA increases the leakiness of the bowel, allowing more endotoxin to enter the circulation (Roig-Perez, et al., 2004).

When cells have enough glucose, oxygen, and thyroid hormone, and aren't being over-stimulated, energy consumption can be uncoupled from the formation of ATP. This allows the mitochondria to devote more energy to the production of the material needed for synthesizing cholesterol and its derivatives, pregnenolone, progesterone, and DHEA, and to form carbon dioxide at a high rate. Uncoupling helps to lower the formation of inflammatory cytokines (Horvath, et al., 2003). A chronically "uncoupled" metabolic state has been associated with longevity (Speakman, et al., 2004). The rate of cholesterol production, and the amount in circulation, tend to be inversely related to systemic inflammation. All of the types of lipoprotein absorb, bind, and help to eliminate endotoxin, for example. Carbon dioxide and the major steroids stabilize cells against excessive stimulation, and protect the cell structure.

Bacteria and plants produce a variety of lipids that serve some purposes analogous to our cholesterol and phospholipids. Some of the common intestinal bacteria produce a molecule containing amino sugars and fatty acids (lipopolysaccharide, LPS), that's called endotoxin. The "endo" root distinguishes it from the "exotoxins" secreted by some bacteria, because the endotoxin is a structural part of the bacterium, that protects the bacterium against some of the exotoxins produced by other microorganisms. Normally, our intestine and liver destroy most of the LPS endotoxin before it reaches the general circulation. The bile acids, a major end product of cholesterol, have a detergent action in the intestine that usually keeps endotoxin in solution, away from the absorptive surfaces of the intestine. If the flow of bile is obstructed, endotoxin is allowed to enter the system (Bertok, 2004). Estrogen can inhibit the flow of bile (Stieger, et al., 2000). A mucus lining is part of the protective barrier, but the microscopic integrity of the intestinal cells themselves finally regulates the passage of materials into the blood and lymphatic vessels.

The barrier function of the intestine is weakened by poisons, malnutrition, and the reduced circulation that can result from stress. Estrogens, such as oral contraceptives or Premarin, can cause colitis by shutting off the blood supply (Gurbuz, et al., 1994; Deana and Dean, 1995).

When our cells are exposed to LPS, they produce many of the same reactions that they would produce in response to our endogenous phospholipids. The major proteins that interact with cholesterol contain lipophilic regions called beta sheets, in which a relatively flat surface is formed by parallel strands of the protein. LPS contains a group of fatty acids bound together by the polysaccharide, that strongly binds to these proteins.

The alarm reaction produced either by damage of some of our own tissue or by the entrance of LPS into the circulation can, under ideal circumstances, lead to a series of protective and defensive reactions, that resolve the problem. The production of steroids is increased, and, early in life, the liberation of fatty acids itself can contribute to the antiinflammatory processes that restore the barrier function and energy production. But when the endogenous omega-9 fatty acids have been thoroughly displaced by dietary omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids, the systemic release of fatty acids becomes an amplifier of the stress state initiated by injury or other stress. The liver, for example, decreases its detoxification of estrogen in the presence of polyunsaturated fatty acids.

In the ovary and uterus, the healthy alternation of excitation and quiescence usually continues for many years, and in rodents it often ends in a state of "persistent estrus," in which the excitatory state can't be terminated in the usual way, by the production of progesterone. In humans, menopause is analogous, because the excitatory FSH hormone from the pituitary becomes excessive, with the ovary continuing to produce estrogen but failing to produce progesterone, sometimes with the pituitary failing to shift from FSH to LH. In rodents, it's recognized that persistent estrus is caused by chronically elevated estrogen, but in humans there has been tremendous resistance to the recognition of estrogen's central role in menopause and senescence. An excess of the basic promoter of inflammation, serotonin, which is closely associated with estrogen's influence, can have similar effects on the reproductive cycle (Cooper, et al., 1986). The industry has devoted the necessary funding to making the easily manipulated medical culture, and the public, believe the opposite, i.e., that reproductive aging is mainly caused by estrogen deficiency.

The liver, besides its important role in keeping endotoxin from reaching the circulation, normally "destroys" all of the estrogen that reaches it, that is, it makes it water soluble so that it will be excreted in the urine or bile, rather than being retained by cells. But in malnutrition, hypothyroidism, or stress, the liver allows estrogen to pass through without being completely inactivated. M.S. Biskind and G.R. Biskind (1941, 1946) showed that the B vitamins were crucial for estrogen elimination, and others around the same time demonstrated that toxins, protein deficiency, hypothyroidism, and even hyperestrogenism itself tended to reduce the liver's ability to detoxify estrogen. Endotoxin's inhibition of this detoxifying system (Banhegyi, et al., 1995) is just one of the ways that it increases estrogen systemically.

Estrogen, which was named for a gadfly, is excitatory in all of its biological actions (including nervous excitation and cellular proliferation), and in most tissues this excitatory action has been shown to cause oxidation damage. Many different toxic changes have been produced in the liver by estrogen, but lipid peroxidation can be clearly demonstrated in the liver as an early reaction to subcutaneous estrogen injection (Genc, et al., 1999).

Endotoxin and estrogen interact in many interesting and potentially deadly ways. Both of them activate many of the same alarm systems, including phospholipases, nitric oxide synthase, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), interleukins (including IL-6, according to Bengtsson, et al., 2004), and the enzymes that form prostaglandins from polyunsaturated fatty acids. Estrogen makes the toxic-mediator-producing cells in the liver (Kupffer cells) hypersensitive to LPS—15 times more sensitive than normal (Ikejima, et al., 1998). One way estrogen increases the toxicity of endotoxin is probably by making the intestine more permeable (Enomoto, et al., 1999). The acute phase reaction, a process in which the liver decreases its production of albumin and increases the production of serum amyloids, lipoproteins, and fibrinogen, is promoted by both estrogen and endotoxin. Estrogen (like endotoxin) activates nuclear factor kappa-B (Shyamala and Guiot, 1992; Hamilton, et al., 2003), which activates cells to produce TNF, nitric oxide, prostaglandins, and interleukins. A long series of observations have indicated that estrogen's main effects begin with redox changes in the mitochondria, and recent evidence (Felty and Roy, 2005) shows that
