# The dark side of stress (learned helplessness)

#### Author: Dr. Ray Peat

---

Acetylcholine is the "neurotransmitter" of cholinergic nerves, including the parasympathetic system.

Cholinesterase (or acetylcholinesterase) is an enzyme that destroys acetylcholine, limiting the action of the cholinergic nerves.

Attaching a phosphate group to the cholinesterase enzyme inactivates it, prolonging and intensifying the action of cholinergic stimulation.

The autonomic nervous system has traditionally been divided into the sympathetic-adrenergic system, and the parasympathetic-cholinergic system, with approximately opposing functions, intensifying energy expenditure and limiting energy expenditure, respectively. The hormonal system and the behavioral system interact with these systems, and each is capable of disrupting the others. Disruptive factors in the environment have increased in recent decades.

Living is development; the choices we make create our individuality. If genetically identical mice grow up in a large and varied environment, small differences in their experience will affect cell growth in their brains, leading to large differences in their exploratory behavior as they age (Freund, et al., 2013). Geneticists used to say that "genes determine our limits," but this experiment shows that an environment can provide both limitations and opportunities for expanding the inherited potential. If our environment restricts our choices, our becoming human is thwarted, the way rats' potentials weren't discovered when they were kept in the standard little laboratory boxes. An opportunity to be complexly involved in a complex environment lets us become more of what we are, more humanly differentiated.

A series of experiments that started at the University of California in 1960 found that rats that lived in larger spaces with various things to explore were better at learning and solving problems than rats that were raised in the standard little laboratory cages (Krech, et al., 1960). Studying their brains, they found that the enzyme cholinesterase, which destroys the neurotransmitter, acetylcholine, was increased. They later found that the offspring of these rats were better learners than their parents, and their brains contained more cholinesterase. Their brains were also larger, with a considerable thickening of the cortex, which is considered to be the part mainly responsible for complex behavior, learning and intelligence.

These processes aren't limited to childhood. For example, London taxi drivers who learn all the streets in the city develop a larger hippocampus, an area of the brain involved with memory.

The 1960s research into environmental enrichment coincided with political changes in the US, but it went against the dominant scientific ideas of the time. Starting in 1945, the US government had begun a series of projects to develop techniques of behavior modification or mind control, using drugs, isolation, deprivation, and torture. In the 1950s, psychiatry often used lobotomies (about 80,000, before they were generally discontinued in the 1980s) and electroconvulsive "therapy," and university psychologists tortured animals, often as part of developing techniques for controlling behavior.

The CIA officially phased out their MKultra program in 1967, but that was the year that Martin Seligman, at the University of Pennsylvania, popularized the idea of "learned helplessness." He found that when an animal was unable to escape from torture, even for a very short time, it would often fail to even try to escape the next time it was tortured. Seligman's lectures have been attended by psychologists who worked at Guantanamo, and he recently received a no-bid Pentagon grant of $31,000,000, to develop a program of "comprehensive soldier fitness," to train marines to avoid learned helplessness.

Curt Richter already in 1957 had described the "hopelessness" phenomenon in rats (“a reaction of hopelessness is shown by some wild rats very soon after being grasped in the hand and prevented from moving. They seem literally to give up,”) and even how to cure their hopelessness, by allowing them to have an experience of escaping once (Richter, 1957, 1958). Rats which would normally be able to keep swimming in a tank for two or three days, would often give up and drown in just a few minutes, after having an experience of "inescapable stress." Richter made the important discovery that the hearts of the hopeless rats slowed down before they died, remaining relaxed and filled with blood, revealing the dominant activity of the vagal nerve, secreting acetylcholine.

The sympathetic nervous system (secreting noradrenaline) accelerates the heart, and is usually activated in stress, in the "fight or flight" reaction, but this radically different (parasympathetic) nervous activity hadn't previously been seen to occur in stressful situations. The parasympathetic, cholinergic, nervous system had been thought of as inactive during stress, and activated to regulate processes of digestion, sleep, and repair. Besides the cholinergic nerves of the parasympathetic system, many nerves of the central nervous system also secrete acetylcholine, which activates smooth muscles, skeletal muscles, glands, and other nerves, and also has some inhibitory effects. The parasympathetic nerves also secrete the enzyme, cholinesterase, which destroys acetylcholine. However, many other types of cell (red blood cells, fibroblasts, sympathetic nerves, marrow cells), maybe all cells, can secrete cholinesterase.

Because cholinergic nerves have been opposed to the sympathetic, adrenergic, nerves, there has been a tendency to neglect their nerve exciting roles, when looking at causes of excitotoxicity, or the stress-induced loss of brain cells. Excessive cholinergic stimulation, however, can contribute to excitotoxic cell death, for example when it's combined with high cortisol and/or hypoglycemia.

Drugs that block the stimulating effects of acetylcholine (the anticholinergics) as well as chemicals that mimic the effects of acetylcholine, such as the organophosphate insecticides, can impair the ability to think and learn. This suggested to some people that age-related dementia was the result of the deterioration of the cholinergic nerves in the brain. Drugs to increase the stimulating effects of acetylcholine in the brain (by inactivating cholinesterase) were promoted as treatment for Alzheimer's disease.

Although herbal inhibitors were well known, profitable new drugs, starting with Tacrine, were put into use. It was soon evident that Tacrine was causing serious liver damage, but wasn't slowing the rate of mental deterioration.

As the failure of the cholinergic drug Tacrine was becoming commonly known, another drug, amantadine (later, the similar memantine) was proposed for combined treatment. In the 1950s, the anticholinergic drug atropine was proposed a few times for treating dementia, and amantadine, which was also considered anticholinergic, was proposed for some mental conditions, including Creutzfeldt-Jacob Disease (Sanders and Dunn, 1973). It must have seemed odd to propose that an anticholinergic drug be used to treat a condition that was being so profitably treated with a pro-cholinergic drug, but memantine came to be classified as an anti-excitatory "NMDA blocker," to protect the remaining cholinergic nerves, so that both drugs could logically be prescribed simultaneously. The added drug seems to have a small beneficial effect, but there has been no suggestion that this could be the result of its previously-known anticholinergic effects.

Over the years, some people have suspected that Alzheimer's disease might be caused partly by a lack of purpose and stimulation in their life, and have found that meaningful, interesting activity could improve their mental functioning. Because the idea of a "genetically determined hard-wired" brain is no longer taught so dogmatically, there is increasing interest in this therapy for all kinds of brain impairment. The analogy to the Berkeley enrichment experience is clear, so the association of increasing cholinesterase activity with improving brain function should be of interest.

The after-effect of poisoning by nerve gas or insecticide has been compared to the dementia of old age. The anticholinergic drugs are generally recognized for protecting against those toxins. Traumatic brain injury, even with improvement in the short term, often starts a long-term degenerative process, greatly increasing the likelihood of dementia at a later age. A cholinergic excitotoxic process is known to be involved in the traumatic degeneration of nerves (Lyeth and Hayes, 1992), and the use of anticholinergic drugs has been recommended for many years to treat traumatic brain injuries (e.g., Ward, 1950: Ruge, 1954; Hayes, et al., 1986).

In 1976 there was an experiment (Rosellini, et al.) that made an important link between the enrichment experiments and the learned helplessness experiments. The control animals in the enrichment experiments were singly housed, while the others shared a larger enclosure. In the later experiment, it was found that the rats "who were reared in isolation died suddenly when placed in a stressful swimming situation," while the group-housed animals were resistant, effective swimmers. Enrichment and deprivation have very clear biological meaning, and one is the negation of the other.

The increase of cholinesterase, the enzyme that destroys acetylcholine, during enrichment, serves to inactivate cholinergic processes. If deprivation does its harm by increasing the activity of the cholinergic system, we should expect that a cholinergic drug might substitute for inescapable stress, as a cause of learned helplessness, and that an anticholinergic drug could cure learned helplessness. Those tests have been done: "Treatment with the anticholinesterase, physostigmine, successfully mimicked the effects of inescapable shock." "The centrally acting anticholinergic scopolamine hydrobromide antagonized the effects of physostigmine, and when administered prior to escape testing antagonized the disruptive effects of previously administered inescapable shock." (Anisman, et al., 1981.)

This kind of experiment would suggest that the anticholinesterase drugs still being used for Alzheimer's disease treatment aren't biologically helpful. In an earlier newsletter I discussed the changes of growth hormone, and its antagonist somatostatin, in association with dementia: Growth hormone increases, somatostatin decreases. The cholinergic nerves are a major factor in shifting those hormones in the direction of dementia, and the anticholinergic drugs tend to increase the ratio of somatostatin to growth hormone. Somatostatin and cholinesterase have been found to co-exist in single nerve cells (Delfs, et al., 1984).

Estrogen, which was promoted so intensively as prevention or treatment for Alzheimer's disease, was finally shown to contribute to its development. One of the characteristic effects of estrogen is to increase the level of growth hormone in the blood. This is just one of many ways that estrogen is associated with cholinergic activation. During pregnancy, it's important for the uterus not to contract. Cholinergic stimulation causes it to contract; too much estrogen activates that system, and causes miscarriage if it's excessive. An important function of progesterone is to keep the uterus relaxed during pregnancy. In the uterus, and in many other systems, progesterone increases the activity of cholinesterase, removing the acetylcholine which, under the influence of estrogen, would cause the uterus to contract.

Progesterone is being used to treat brain injuries, very successfully. It protects against inflammation, and in an early study, compared to placebo, lowered mortality by more than half. It's instructive to consider its anticholinergic role in the uterus, in relation to its brain protective effects. When the brain is poisoned by an organophosphate insecticide, which lowers the activity of cholinesterase, seizures are likely to occur, and treatment with progesterone can prevent those seizures, reversing the inhibition of the enzyme (and increasing the activity of cholinesterase in rats that weren't poisoned) (Joshi, et al., 2010). Similar effects of progesterone on cholinesterase occur in menstrually cycling women (Fairbrother, et al., 1989), implying that this is a general function of progesterone, not just something to protect pregnancy. Estrogen, with similar generality, decreases the activity of cholinesterase. DHEA, like progesterone, increases the activity of cholinesterase, and is brain protective (Aly, et al., 2011).

Brain trauma consistently leads to decreased activity of this enzyme (Östberg, et al., 2011; Donat, et al., 2007), causing the acetylcholine produced in the brain to accumulate, with many interesting consequences. In 1997, a group (Pike, et al.) created brain injuries in rats to test the idea that a cholinesterase inhibitor would improve their recovery and ability to move through a maze. They found instead that it reduced the cognitive ability of both the injured and normal rats. An anticholinergic drug, selegeline (deprenyl) that is used to treat Parkinson's disease and, informally, as a mood altering antiaging drug, was found by a different group (Zhu, et al., 2000) to improve cognitive recovery from brain injuries.

One of acetylcholine's important functions, in the brain as elsewhere, is the relaxation of blood vessels, and this is done by activating the synthesis of NO, nitric oxide. (Without NO, acetylcholine constricts blood vessels; Librizzi, et al., 2000.) The basic control of blood flow in the brain is the result of the relaxation of the wall of blood vessels in the presence of carbon dioxide, which is produced in proportion to the rate at which oxygen and glucose are being metabolically combined by active cells. In the inability of cells to produce CO2 at a normal rate, nitric oxide synthesis in blood vessels can cause them to dilate. The mechanism of relaxation by NO is very different, however, involving the inhibition of mitochondrial energy production (Barron, et al., 2001). Situations that favor the production and retention of a larger amount of carbon dioxide in the tissues are likely to reduce the basic "tone" of the parasympathetic nervous system, as there is less need for additional vasodilation.

Nitric oxide can diffuse away from the blood vessels, affecting the energy metabolism of nerve cells (Steinert, et al., 2010). Normally, astrocytes protect nerve cells from nitric oxide (Chen, et al., 2001), but that function can be altered, for example by bacterial endotoxin absorbed from the intestine (Solà, et al., 2002) or by amyloid-beta (Tran, 2001), causing them to produce nitric oxide themselves.

Nitric oxide is increasingly seen as an important factor in nerve degeneration (Doherty, 2011). Nitric oxide activates processes (Obukuro, et al., 2013) that can lead to cell death. Inhibiting the production of nitric oxide protects against various kinds of dementia (Sharma & Sharma, 2013; Sharma & Singh, 2013). Brain trauma causes a large increase in nitric oxide formation, and blocking its synthesis improves recovery (Hüttemann, et al., 2008; Gahm, et al., 2006). Organophosphates increase nitric oxide formation, and the protective anticholinergic drugs such as atropine reduce it (Chang, et al., 2001; Kim, et al., 1997). Stress, including fear (Campos, et al., 2013) and isolation (Zlatković & Filipović, 2013) can activate the formation of nitric oxide, and various mediators of inflammation also activate it. The nitric oxide in a person's exhaled breath can be used to diagnose some diseases, and it probably also reflects the level of their emotional well-being.

The increase of cholinesterase by enriched living serves to protect tissues against an accumulation of acetylcholine. The activation of nitric oxide synthesis by acetylcholine tends to block energy production, and to activate autolytic or catabolic processes, which are probably involved in the development of a thinner cerebral cortex in isolated or stressed animals. Breaking down acetylcholine rapidly, the tissue renewal processes are able to predominate in the enriched animals.

Environmental conditions that are favorable for respiratory energy production are protective against learned helplessness and neurodegeneration, and other biological problems that involve the same mechanisms. Adaptation to high altitude, which stimulates the formation of new mitochondria and increased thyroid (T3) activity, has been used for many years to treat neurological problems, and the effect has been demonstrated in animal experiments (Manukhina, et al., 2010). Bright light can reverse the cholinergic effects of inescapable stress (Flemmer, et al., 1990).

During the development of learned helplessness, the T3 level in the blood decreases (Helmreich, et al., 2006), and removal of the thyroid gland creates the "escape deficit," while supplementing with thyroid hormone before exposing the animal to inescapable shock prevents its development (Levine, et al., 1990). After learned helplessness has been created in rats, supplementing with T3 reverses it (Massol, et al., 1987, 1988).

Hypothyroidism and excess cholinergic tone have many similarities, including increased formation of nitric oxide, so that similar symptoms, such as muscle inflammation, can be produced by cholinesterase inhibitors such as Tacrine, by increased nitric oxide, or by simple hypothyroidism (Jeyarasasingam, et al., 2000; Franco, et al., 2006).

Insecticide exposure has been suspected to be a factor in the increased incidence of Alzheimer's disease (Zaganas, et al., 2013), but it could be contributing to many other problems, involving inflammation, edema, and degeneration. Another important source of organophosphate poisoning is the air used to pressurize airliners, which can be contaminated with organophosphate fumes coming from the engine used to compress it.

Possibly the most toxic component of our environment is the way the society has been designed, to eliminate meaningful choices for most people. In the experiment of Freund, et al., some mice became more exploratory because of the choices they made, while others' lives became more routinized and limited. Our culture reinforces routinized living. In the absence of opportunities to vary the way you work and live to accord with new knowledge that you gain, the nutritional, hormonal and physical factors have special importance.

Supplements of thyroid and progesterone are proven to be generally protective against the cholinergic threats, but there are many other factors that can be adjusted according to particular needs. Niacinamide, like progesterone, inhibits the production of nitric oxide, and also like progesterone, it improves recovery from brain injury (Hoane, et al., 2008). In genetically altered mice with an Alzheimer's trait, niacinamide corrects the defect (Green, et al., 2008). Drugs such as atropine and antihistamines can be used in crisis situations. Bright light, without excess ultraviolet, should be available every day.

The cholinergic system is much more than a part of the nervous system, and is involved in cell metabolism and tissue renewal. Most people can benefit from reducing intake of phosphate, iron, and polyunsaturated fats (which can inhibit cholinesterase; Willis, et al., 2009), and from choosing foods that reduce production and absorption of endotoxin. And, obviously, drugs that are intended to increase the effects of nitric oxide (asparagine, zildenafil/Viagra, minoxidil/Rogaine) and acetylcholine (bethanechol, benzpyrinium, etc.) should be avoided.

---

## References

*   Aly HF, Metwally FM, Ahmed HH. Acta Biochim Pol. 2011;58(4):513-20. Neuroprotective effects of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) in rat model of Alzheimer's disease.
*   Anisman H, Glazier SJ, Sklar LS. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1981;74(1):81-7. Cholinergic influences on escape deficits produced by uncontrollable stress.
*   Barron JT, Gu L, Parrillo JE. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Nov 1;1506(3):204-11. Endothelial- and nitric oxide-dependent effects on oxidative metabolism of intact artery.
*   Bartos EM. J Cell Biol. 1976 June 1; 69(3): 638–646. Properties of growth-related acetylcholinesterase in a cell line of fibroblastic origin.
*   Battisti V, Bagatini MD, Maders LD, Chiesa J, Santos KF, Gonçalves JF, Abdalla FH, Battisti IE, Schetinger MR, Morsch VM. Biomed Pharmacother. 2012 Jun;66(4):249-55. Cholinesterase activities and biochemical determinations in patients with prostate cancer: influence of Gleason score, treatment and bone metastasis.
*   Bear MF, Singer W. Nature 1986;320(6058):172-6. Modulation of visual cortical plasticity by acetylcholine and noradrenaline.
*   Bergeman CS, Plomin R, McClearn GE, Pedersen NL, Friberg LT. Psychol Aging. 1988 Dec;3(4):399-406. Genotype-environment interaction in personality development: identical twins reared apart.
*   Breitner JC, Welsh KA, Helms MJ, Gaskell PC, Gau BA, Roses AD, Pericak-Vance MA, Saunders AM. Neurobiol Aging. 1995 Jul-Aug;16(4):523-30. Delayed onset of Alzheimer's disease with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory and histamine H2 blocking drugs.
*   Brochet DM, Martin P, Soubrié P, Simon P. Psychiatry Res. 1987 Jul;21(3):267-75. Triiodothyronine potentiation of antidepressant-induced reversal of learned helplessness in rats.
*   Brown L, Rosellini RA, Samuels OB, Riley EP. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1982 Nov;17(5):877-83. Evidence for a serotonergic mechanism of the learned helplessness phenomenon.
*   Campos AC, Piorino EM, Ferreira FR, Guimarães FS. Behav Brain Res. 2013 Aug 12. pii: S0166-4328(13)00482-8. Increased nitric oxide-mediated neurotransmission in the medial prefrontal cortex is associated with the long lasting anxiogenic-like effect of predator exposure.
*   Carriere JL, El-Fakahany EE. Pharmacology. 2000 Feb;60(2):82-9. Choline is a full agonist in inducing activation of neuronal nitric oxide synthase via the muscarinic M1 receptor.
*   Chang AY, Chan JY, Kao FJ, Huang CM, Chan SH. J Biomed Sci. 2001 Nov-Dec;8(6):475-83. Engagement of inducible nitric oxide synthase at the rostral ventrolateral medulla during mevinphos intoxication in the rat.
*   Chien JL, Warren JR. Cancer Res. 1986 Nov;46(11):5706-14. Muscarinic receptor coupling to intracellular calcium release in rat pancreatic acinar carcinoma.
*   Crespo JA, Sturm K, Saria A, Zernig G. J. Neurosci. 2006 May;26(22):6004–10. Activation of muscarinic and nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the nucleus accumbens core is necessary for the acquisition of drug reinforcement.
*   de la Monte SM, Jhaveri A, Maron BA, Wands JR. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2007 Apr;66(4):272-83. Nitric oxide synthase 3-mediated neurodegeneration after intracerebral gene delivery.
*   Delfs JR, Zhu CH, Dichter MA. Science. 1984 Jan 6;223(4631):61-3. Coexistence of acetylcholinesterase and somatostatin-immunoreactivity in neurons cultured from rat cerebrum.
*   Deniselle MC, Carreras MC, Garay L, Gargiulo-Monachelli G, Meyer M, Poderoso JJ, De Nicola AF. J Neurochem. 2012 Jul;122(1):185-95. Progesterone prevents mitochondrial dysfunction in the spinal cord of wobbler mice.
*   Dhanushkodi A, Bindu B, Raju TR, Kutty BM. Behav Neurosci. 2007 Jun;121(3):491-500. Exposure to enriched environment improves spatial learning performances and enhances cell density but not choline acetyltransferase activity in the hippocampus of ventral subicular-lesioned rats.
*   Diamond MC, Ingham CA, Johnson RE, Bennett EL, Rosenzweig MR. J Neurobiol. 1976 Jan;7(1):75-85. Effects of environment on morphology of rat cerebral cortex and hippocampus.
*   Doherty GH. Neurosci Bull. 2011 Dec;27(6):366-82. Nitric oxide in neurodegeneration: potential benefits of non-steroidal anti-inflammatories.
*   Doi K, Iwahashi K, Tsunekawa K. Jpn J Surg. 1991 Jan;21(1):43-9. Participation of the parasympathetic nervous system in the development of activity-stress ulcers.
*   Donat CK, Schuhmann MU, Voigt C, Nieber K, Schliebs R, Brust P. Brain Inj. 2007 Sep;21(10):1031-7. Alterations of acetylcholinesterase activity after traumatic brain injury in rats.
*   Edvinsson L, Owman Ch. Fiziol Zh SSSR Im I M Sechenova. 1975 Oct;61(10):1466-72. [Amine receptors in brain vessels].
*   Edwards E, Johnson J, Anderson D, Turano P, Henn FA. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1986 Aug;25(2):415-21. Neurochemical and behavioral consequences of mild, uncontrollable shock: effects of PCPA.
*   Esteller M. Curr Opin Oncol. 2005 Jan;17(1):55-60. DNA methylation and cancer therapy: new developments and expectations.
*   Fairbrother A, Wagner SL, Welch S, Smith BB. Environ Res. 1989 Aug;49(2):181-9. Influence of menstrual cycle on serum cholinesterase.
*   Fernandez AP, Pozo-Rodrigalvarez A, Serrano J, Martinez-Murillo R. Curr Pharm Des. 2010;16(25):2837-50. Nitric oxide: target for therapeutic strategies in Alzheimer's disease.
*   Flemmer DD, Dilsaver SC, Peck JA. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1990 Aug;36(4):775-8. Bright light blocks the capacity of inescapable swim stress to supersensitize a central muscarinic mechanism.
*   Franco MC, Antico Arciuch VG, Peralta JG, Galli S, Levisman D, López LM, Romorini L, Poderoso JJ, Carreras MC. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 24;281(8):4779-86. Hypothyroid phenotype is contributed by mitochondrial complex I inactivation due to translocated neuronal nitric-oxide synthase.
*   Freund J, Brandmaier AM, Lewejohann L, Kirste I, Kritzler M, Krüger A, Sachser N, Lindenberger U, Kempermann G. Science. 2013 May 10;340(6133):756-9. Emergence of individuality in genetically identical mice.
*   Gahm C, Holmin S, Wiklund PN, Brundin L, Mathiesen T. J Neurotrauma. 2006 Sep;23(9):1343-54. Neuroprotection by selective inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase after experimental brain contusion.
*   Gatón J, Fernández de la Gándara F, Velasco A. Comp Biochem Physiol C. 1993 Sep;106(1):125-9. The role of the neurotransmitters acetylcholine and noradrenaline in the pathogenesis of stress ulcers.
*   Gibson CL, Constantin D, Prior MJ, Bath PM, Murphy SP. Exp Neurol. 2005 Jun;193(2):522-30. Progesterone suppresses the inflammatory response and nitric oxide synthase-2 expression following cerebral ischemia.
*   Grahn RE, Watkins LR, Maier SF. Behav Brain Res 2000 Jul;112(1-2):33-41. Impaired escape performance and enhanced conditioned fear in rats following exposure to an uncontrollable stressor are mediated by glutamate and nitric oxide in the dorsal raphe nucleus.
*   Green KN, Steffan JS, Martinez-Coria H, Sun X, Schreiber SS, Thompson LM, LaFerla FM. J Neurosci. 2008 Nov 5;28(45):11500-10. Nicotinamide restores cognition in Alzheimer's disease transgenic mice via a mechanism involving sirtuin inhibition and selective reduction of Thr231-phosphotau.
*   Harris LW, Garry VF, Jr, Moore RD. Biochem Pharmacol. 1974 Aug;23(15):2155–2163. Biosynthesis of cholinesterase in rabbit bone marrow cells in culture.
*   Hayes RL, Stonnington HH, Lyeth BG, Dixon CE, Yamamoto T. Cent Nerv Syst Trauma. 1986 Spring;3(2):163-73. Metabolic and neurophysiologic sequelae of brain injury: a cholinergic hypothesis.
*   Heller M, Hanahan DJ. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1972 Jan 17;255(1):251–272. Human erythrocyte membrane bound enzyme acetylcholinesterase.
*   Helmreich DL, Crouch M, Dorr NP, Parfitt DB. Physiol Behav. 2006 Jan 30;87(1):114-9. Peripheral triiodothyronine (T(3)) levels during escapable and inescapable footshock.
*   Hoane MR, Pierce JL, Holland MA, Anderson GD. Neuroscience. 2008 Jun 26;154(3):861-8. Nicotinamide treatment induces behavioral recovery when administered up to 4 hours following cortical contusion injury in the rat.
*   Hunt JS, Miller L, Roby KF, Huang J, Platt JS, DeBrot BL. J Reprod Immunol 1997 Nov 15;35(2):87-99. Female steroid hormones regulate production of pro-inflammatory molecules in uterine leukocytes.
*   Hüttemann M, Lee I, Kreipke CW, Petrov T. Neuroscience. 2008 Jan 2;151(1):148-54. Suppression of the inducible form of nitric oxide synthase prior to traumatic brain injury improves cytochrome c oxidase activity and normalizes cellular energy levels.
*   Jeyarasasingam G, Yeluashvili M, Quik M. Neuroreport. 2000 Apr 27;11(6):1173-6. Tacrine, a reversible acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, induces myopathy.
*   Jeyarasasingam G, Yeluashvili M, Quik M. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2000 Oct;295(1):314-20. Nitric oxide is involved in acetylcholinesterase inhibitor-induced myopathy in rats.
*   Joshi V, Arora T, Mehta AK, Sharma AK, Rathor N, Mehta KD, Mahajan P, Mediratta PK, Banerjee BD, Sharma KK. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2010 Oct;382(4):311-20. Effect of phosphamidon on convulsive behavior and biochemical parameters: modulation by progesterone and 4'-chlorodiazepam in rats.
*   Kadar T, Cohen G, Sahar R, Alkalai D, Shapira S. Hum Exp Toxicol. 1992 Nov;11(6):517-23. Long-term study of brain lesions following soman, in comparison to DFP and metrazol poisoning.
*   Katayama S, Kito S, Yamamura Y. Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol. 1990 Jun;68(3):391-4. Increase of muscarinic receptor following kainic acid lesions of the nucleus basalis magnocellularis in rat brain: an autoradiographic study.
*   Kim SW, Yu BP, Sanderford M, Herlihy JT. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1994 Oct;207(1):43-7. Dietary restriction modulates the norepinephrine content and uptake of the heart and cardiac synaptosomes.
*   Kim YB, Hur GH, Lee YS, Han BG, Shin S. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 1997 Feb 15;3(1):53-6. A role of nitric oxide in organophosphate-induced convulsions.
*   Kitamura Y, Matsuoka Y, Nomura Y, Taniguchi T. Life Sci 1998;62(17-18):1717-21. Induction of inducible nitric oxide synthase and heme oxygenase-1 in rat glial cells.
*   Krech D, Rosenzweig MR, Bennett EL. J Comp Physiol Psychol. 1960 Dec;53:509-19. Effects of environmental complexity and training on brain chemistry.
*   Levine JD, Strauss LR, Muenz LR, Dratman MB, Stewart KT, Adler NT. Physiol Behav. 1990 Jul;48(1):165-7. Thyroparathyroidectomy produces a progressive escape deficit in rats.
*   Librizzi L, Folco G, de Curtis M. Neuroscience. 2000;101(2):283-7. Nitric oxide synthase inhibitors unmask acetylcholine-mediated constriction of cerebral vessels in the in vitro isolated guinea-pig brain.
*   Lyeth BG, Hayes RL. J Neurotrauma. 1992 May;9 Suppl 2:S463-74. Cholinergic and opioid mediation of traumatic brain injury.
*   Manukhina EB, Goryacheva AV, Barskov IV, Viktorov IV, Guseva AA, Pshennikova MG, Khomenko IP, Mashina SY, Pokidyshev DA, Malyshev IY. Neurosci Behav Physiol. 2010 Sep;40(7):737-43. Prevention of neurodegenerative damage to the brain in rats in experimental Alzheimer's disease by adaptation to hypoxia.
*   Martin P, Brochet D, Soubrie P, Simon P. Biol Psychiatry. 1985 Sep;20(9):1023-5. Triiodothyronine-induced reversal of learned helplessness in rats.
*   Massol J, Martin P, Soubrié P, Simon P. Eur J Pharmacol. 1987 Feb 24;134(3):345-8. Triiodothyroacetic acid-induced reversal of learned helplessness in rats.
*   Massol J, Martin P, Soubrié P, Puech AJ. Eur J Pharmacol. 1988 Aug 2;152(3):347-51. Triiodothyroacetic acid (TRIAC) potentiation of antidepressant-induced reversal of learned helplessness in rats.
*   Mawdsley JE. Gut. 2005 Oct;54(10). Psychological stress in IBD: new insights into pathogenic and ...
*   Miller L, Alley EW, Murphy WJ, Russell SW, Hunt JS. J Leukoc Biol 1996 Mar;59(3):442-50. Progesterone inhibits inducible nitric oxide synthase gene expression and nitric oxide production in murine macrophages.
*   Mychasiuk R, Zahir S, Schmold N, Ilnytskyy S, Kovalchuk O, Gibb R. Behav Brain Res. 2012 Mar 17;228(2):294-8. Parental enrichment and offspring development: modifications to brain, behavior and the epigenome.
*   Nyquist Battie C, Moran N. Cardiovasc Res. 1990 Apr;24(4):335-9. Sympathectomy alters acetylcholinesterase expression in adult rat heart.
*   Obukuro K, Nobunaga M, Takigawa M, Morioka H, Hisatsune A, Isohama Y, Shimokawa H, Tsutsui M, Katsuki H. J Neurosci. 2013 Jul 31;33(31):12557-12568. Nitric Oxide Mediates Selective Degeneration of Hypothalamic Orexin Neurons through Dysfunction of Protein Disulfide Iisomerase.
*   Oriaku ET, Soliman KF. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther. 1986 Mar;280(1):136-44. Effect of stress and glucocorticoids on the gastrointestinal cholinergic enzymes.
*   Östberg A, Virta J, Rinne JO, Oikonen V, Luoto P, Någren K, Arponen E, Tenovuo O. Neurology. 2011 Mar 22;76(12):1046-50. Cholinergic dysfunction after traumatic brain injury: preliminary findings from a PET study.
*   Palmer J, Love S. Pharmacol Res. 2011 Jun;63(6):525-31. Endothelin receptor antagonists: potential in Alzheimer's disease.
*   Petrov KA, Malomouzh AI, Kovyazina IV, Krejci E, Nikitashina AD, Proskurina SE, Zobov VV, Nikolsky EE. Eur J Neurosci. 2013 Jan;37(2):181-9. Regulation of acetylcholinesterase activity by nitric oxide in rat neuromuscular junction via N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor activation.
*   Pike BR, Hamm RJ, Temple MD, Buck DL, Lyeth BG. J Neurotrauma. 1997 Dec;14(12):897-905. Effect of tetrahydroaminoacridine, a cholinesterase inhibitor, on cognitive performance following experimental brain injury.
*   Ray A, Sullivan RM, Henke PG. J Auton Nerv Syst. 1987 Oct;20(3):265-8. Adrenergic modulation of gastric stress pathology in rats: a cholinergic link.
*   Ray DE. Toxicol Lett. 1998 Dec 28;102-103:527-33. Chronic effects of low level exposure to anticholinesterases--a mechanistic review.
*   Richter CP. Psychosom Med. 1957 May-Jun;19(3):191-8. On the phenomenon of sudden death in animals and man.
*   Rosellini RA, Binik YM, Seligman MP. Psychosom Med. 1976 Jan-Feb;38(1):55-8. Sudden death in the laboratory rat.
*   Rubin RT, Rhodes ME, O'Toole S, Czambel RK. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2002 May;26(5):672-81. Sexual diergism of hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal cortical responses to low-dose physotigmine in elderly vs. young women and men.
*   Ruge D. J Neurosurg. 1954 Jan;11(1):77-83. The use of cholinergic blocking agents in the treatment of cranio-cerebral injuries.
*   Sanders WL, Dunn TL. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1973 Aug;36(4):581-4. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease treated with amantidine. A report of two cases.
*   Schuller HM. Anticancer Drugs. 2008 Aug;19(7):655-71. Neurotransmission and cancer: implications for prevention and therapy.
*   Sharma B, Sharma PM. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 Aug 3. pii: S0041-008X(13)00326-8. Arsenic toxicity induced endothelial dysfunction and dementia: Pharmacological interdiction by histone deacetylase and inducible nitric oxide synthase inhibitors.
*   Sharma B, Singh N. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2013 Feb;103(4):821-30. Pharmacological inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase, convalesce behavior and biochemistry of hypertension induced vascular dementia in rats.
*   Sharma HS, Nyberg F, Gordh T, Alm P, Westman J. Acta Neurochir Suppl. 1997;70:130-3. Topical application of insulin like growth factor-1 reduces edema and upregulation of neuronal nitric oxide synthase following trauma to the rat spinal cord.
*   Shen ZX. Med Hypotheses. 2004;63(2):308-21. Brain cholinesterases: II. The molecular and cellular basis of Alzheimer's disease.
*   Singh M, Su C. Horm Behav. 2013 Feb;63(2):284-90. Progesterone and neuroprotection.
*   Steinert JR, Chernova T, Forsythe ID. Neuroscientist. 2010 Aug;16(4):435-52. Nitric oxide signaling in brain function, dysfunction, and dementia.
*   Tang H, Hua F, Wang J, Sayeed I, Wang X, Chen Z, Yousuf S, Atif F, Stein DG. Horm Behav. 2013 Jul 27. pii: S0018-506X(13)00139-6. Progesterone and vitamin D: Improvement after traumatic brain injury in middle-aged rats.
*   Taton G, Delhaye M, Swillens S, Morisset J, Larose L, Longnecker DS, Poirier GG. Int J Cancer. 1985 Apr 15;35(4):493-7. Muscarinic cholinergic receptors in pancreatic acinar carcinoma of rat.
*   Teaktong T, Graham A, Court J, Perry R, Jaros E, Johnson M, Hall R, Perry E. Glia. 2003 Jan 15;41(2):207-11. Alzheimer's disease is associated with a selective increase in alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor immunoreactivity in astrocytes.
*   Tran MH, Yamada K, Olariu A, Mizuno M, Ren XH, Nabeshima T. FASEB J. 2001 Jun;15(8):1407-9. Amyloid beta-peptide induces nitric oxide production in rat hippocampus: association with cholinergic dysfunction and amelioration by inducible nitric oxide synthase inhibitors.
*   Wang XY, Li XJ, Li DL, Wang CR, Guo XP. Zhongguo Ying Yong Sheng Li Xue Za Zhi. 2012 May;28(3):253-4, 262. [Progesterone exerts neuroprotective effect on hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy-induced brain damage via inhibition expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase and nitric oxide production].
*   Ward A Jr. J Neurosurg. 1950 Sep;7(5):398-402. Atropine in the treatment of closed head injury.
*   Wenk G, Sweeney J, Hughey D, Carson J, Olton D. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1986 Sep;25(3):521-6. Cholinergic function and memory: extensive inhibition of choline acetyltransferase fails to impair radial maze performance in rats.
*   Willis LM, Shukitt-Hale B, Joseph JA. Genes Nutr. 2009 December; 4(4): 309–314. Dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids improve cholinergic transmission in the aged brain.
*   Yang X, Askarova S, Sheng W, Chen JK, Sun AY, Sun GY, Yao G, Lee JC. Neuroscience. 2010 Dec 15;171(3):859-68. Low energy laser light (632.8 nm) suppresses amyloid-β peptide-induced oxidative and inflammatory responses in astrocytes.
*   Zaganas I, Kapetanaki S, Mastorodemos V, Kanavouras K, Colosio C, Wilks MF, Tsatsakis AM. Toxicology. 2013 May 10;307:3-11. Linking pesticide exposure and dementia: what is the evidence?
*   Yoshioka S, Acosta TJ, Okuda K. Mol Reprod Dev. 2012 Oct;79(10):689-96. Roles of cytokines and progesterone in the regulation of the nitric oxide generating system in bovine luteal endothelial cells.
*   Zhu J, Hamm RJ, Reeves TM, Povlishock JT, Phillips LL. Exp Neurol. 2000 Nov;166(1):136-52. Postinjury administration of L-deprenyl improves cognitive function and enhances neuroplasticity after traumatic brain injury.
*   Zlatković J, Filipović D. Neurochem Int. 2013 Sep;63(3):172-9. Chronic social isolation induces NF-κB activation and upregulation of iNOS protein expression in rat prefrontal cortex.
